Indonesia has enormous potential in renewable resources as outlined in Table below The
potential renewable energy resources are based on a technical assessment by the MoEMR
only but do not necessarily consider the financial/economic viability of individual projects
However Government Regulation No on the National Energy Policy the
requires that the development of renewable energy resources consider economic
The potential resource estimates in Table also do not consider locational factors
as some renewable energy resources are located in areas with very low electricity
demand). As such, some renewable energy projects may not be economically feasible.
Renewable energy is nevertheless looking increasingly attractive in Indonesia not only to
support environmental policy around CO2 emissions and urban air pollution but also due to the
improving cost profile and ability to be deployed in a more decentralised manner. According to
the 2018 RUPTL key factors and trends in the five major renewable energy sectors include:
• Hydro: Hydropower is currently the largest single source of renewable power in Indonesia.
In 2017, hydro accounted for 7.1% of national power generation with this expected to
grow to 9.3% in 2027. Many prospective sites have good water flow although limitations
on foreign ownership may hold back smaller projects (see Section 2.5.2 - The Negative List
for further details). On 2 August 2017 and 8 September 2017 however, the MoEMR gave
in-principle approval for at least 50 small hydro (≤ 10 Megawatt (“MW”)) Power Purchase
Agreements (“PPAs”) with PLN at tariffs between IDR 780 and 1,050/kWh. Since then,
approximately 38 small hydro projects have reported difficulties in reaching financial close
as at the end of the first quarter of 2018.14 In April 2018, IPP hydropower developers were
invited by PLN to a general pre-qualification process for future hydropower projects with
over 100 developers submitting applications to PLN.15
• Solar PV: Despite naturally high solar penetration across most parts of the country Solar
PV deployment currently remains limited (estimated to be 109 MWp)16. The potential is
estimated to be around 208 GWp.17 There have been several revisions to the regulations
underpinning Solar PV pricing and procurement over the past few years although the
problematic regulations regarding local content remain (see Section 2.2.3 - Local Content).
Based on Official Letter of the Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources No. 5827/23/
MEM.I./2017 up to six Solar PV PPAs have been signed but, at the time of the writing,
two out of the six were reported to be facing difficulties with reaching financial close as
at the end of the first quarter of 2018. There is no further information regarding the
MW of solar PV tenders in Sumatera after pre-qualification was completed in the secondhalf
of 2017. The tenders are understood to be waiting for administrative documents to be
completed
Geothermal: With Indonesia possessing the second-largest geothermal resource in the
world the geothermal share of the fuel mix is expected to almost double from 5% in 2017
to 9.8% in 2027. A key strength of geothermal is its ability to provide base-load power
offsetting one of the traditional weaknesses of renewable energy. However, there are only a
limited number of concessions under development with PPA approval slow and Indonesian
state-owned enterprises (“SOEs”) playing a dominant role. Notwithstanding this, the
Independent Power Producer (“IPP”)-driven Sarulla project came online in March 2017
with Unit-1 (110 MW), followed by Unit-2 in October 2017 (110 MW) and Unit-3 in May
2018 (110 MW). There was also the Karaha geothermal power plant (30 MW) becoming
operational in April 2018.19 Along with hydropower, PLN also invited developers of
geothermal power plants to a pre-qualification process in April 2018.
Bioenergy: The bioenergy market consists of discrete segments such as agricultural/
plantation biomass waste, Palm Oil Mill Effluent (“POME”), Municipal Solid Waste
(“MSW”) and biodiesel. The market largely consists of power plants with 10 MW or less
of capacity. Significant potential remains with large amounts of agricultural waste and
MSW currently being improperly disposed of, however, realising this potential will require
changes in the regulatory and contracting environment especially at the sub-national
government level. The recently issued Presidential Regulation (“PR”) No. 35/2018 is the
current reference for MSW PPAs. On 2 August 2017, PLN also signed at least four biomass
and five biogas PPAs ≤ 10 MW at tariffs between IDR 890 and IDR 1,555/kWh. However it
is reported that five Bioenergy PPAs have faced difficulties in financing their projects as of
the first quarter of 2018.20 78 companies were nevertheless reported to have participated in
the tender for waste-to-energy infrastructure in Tangerang while waste power plants of an
aggregate 95 MW across Indonesia are yet to be awarded
Wind: Historically wind has not played an important role in Indonesia’s fuel mix. However,
significant progress has been observed with UPC’s 75 MW Sidrap wind farm in South
Sulawesi becoming operational from March 2018, and being officially inaugurated by
President Joko Widodo in July 2018.22 The 72 MW Jeneponto wind farm in the same
province is also expected to become operational in the near future
MoEMR Regulation No. 50/2017 regulates the tariff regimes for renewable electricity
generation with tariffs still benchmarked to PLN’s average electricity generation cost (Biaya
Pokok Pembangkitan – “BPP”). As a result developers are still facing challenges regarding the
viability of the new power plant projects although the severity of the impact depends on the
geographical area.
Many factors support renewable deployment, including falling costs, national carbon emissions
targets, the high cost of oil-based generation (especially in remote regions) and the regulatory
and physical barriers to gas distribution. However, the lack of a bankable PPA has become a
major concern. Of the 70 renewable power plant projects signed before the end of 2017, 55
projects have since experienced financing difficulties.24 As of June 2018, 45 projects were
reported to have made no progress towards financial close with only four projects having
reached COD.25 METI also stated that most of their members were unable to secure funding for
new renewables projects under the new PPAs.26
Further discussion on renewables, as well as other technologies such as ocean thermal energy
conversion, can be found in Chapter 5. Please also see Section 5.9 - New Tariff Stipulations for
Renewable Energy for more information on MoEMR Regulation No. 50/2017.
Under Law No. 30/2009 (the “2009 Electricity Law”), electricity tariffs no longer need to be
uniform throughout Indonesia and thus may differ between operating areas or Wilayah Usaha.
Tariffs are differentiated depending on the end user group. In general, electricity tariffs are
set by taking into account the customer’s purchasing power as well as the installed power
capacity of each customer group. The higher the installed power the higher the tariff imposed.
The higher the electricity consumption the higher the multiplier used to determine the tariff
imposed in order to encourage customers to use electricity wisely. Different tariffs are subject
to different subsidy arrangements. For example tariffs for low income households are heavily
subsidised with IDR 415/kWh representing a price of less than a third of the average electricity
supply cost of IDR 1,318/kWh in 2017.27
Prior to 2013, PLN’s revenue was dictated by regulated electricity prices with tariffs set by the
Central Government and ultimately approved by Parliament. This was except for electricity
prices in Batam which were approved by the Regional Government. Since price increases
required approval from Parliament, PLN’s financial position was directly subject to the political
process. Should the regulated price for electricity fall below the cost of production (which
has generally been the case) the Ministry of Finance (“MoF”) is required to compensate PLN
through a subsidy. Since 2013, the electricity subsidy has stabilised due to the stabilisation of
the average cost of electricity supply as well as PLN’s ability to pass on increases in inflation,
the price of oil and the USD/IDR exchange rate to (non-subsidised) consumers (the “automatic
tariff adjustment mechanism”) through MoEMR Regulation No. 31/2014, as amended
by MoEMR Regulation No. 9/2015 (see Table 1.2). This subsidy includes a public service
obligation (“PSO”) margin which was originally set in 2009 at 5% above the cost of electricity
supplied. The margin was increased to 8% for 2010 and 2011 and then reduced to 7% from
2012.
Being an archipelago, Indonesia’s electricity is managed through a series of separate T&D grids.
There are over 600 isolated grids and eight major networks in total. PLN currently has a defacto
monopoly on T&D asset ownership and operations although the private sector is legally
permitted to operate T&D grids (see Section 2.2.2.2 - Transmission, Distribution and Retailing).
Certain transmission lines are built by IPPs, particularly for power plants in remote areas, in
order to connect the power plants to the closest PLN substations. However, ownership of these
transmission lines will typically be transferred to PLN upon the completion of construction.
At the end of 2017, PLN served 67.5 million customers through a transmission network
comprised of 48,901 kilometre circuits (“kmc”) of transmission lines and 113,791 Megavolt
Amperes (“MVA”) of transmission transformer capacity. Given that close to 5% of the
population of Indonesia is without access to electricity, and many of those who are connected
suffer frequent supply interruptions, it is unsurprising that the expansion of power generation
and T&D networks is both a top priority and a major challenge. According to the 2018 RUPTL,
PLN projects electricity demand to grow at 6.9% p.a. until 2027 reaching a total of 434 TWh of
electricity consumed in 2027. This is compared to 223 TWh in 2017. By 2024, the Government
expects the entire population of Indonesia to have access to electricity.
Renewables have increased in importance in recent years due to concerns over global warming
and other environmental issues. Certain renewable technologies have also become more
attractive due to falling costs. These factors are reflected in the target energy mix for primary
energy demand in Indonesia with the renewable energy portion being increased to 23% based
on the 2014 NEP compared to 17% based on PR No. 5/2006. In addition, the 2014 NEP aims
to achieve an optimal primary energy mix of: (1) NRE of at least 23%, oil of less than 25%,
coal of at least 30% and natural gas of at least 22% by 2025; (2) NRE of at least 31%, oil of less
than 20%, coal of at least 25% and natural gas of at least 24% by 2050. Further, the 2014 NEP
aims for a primary energy supply of 400 Million Tonnes of Oil Equivalent (“MTOE”) and 1,000
MTOE by 2025 and 2050 respectively, or 1.4 TOE/capita and 3.2 TOE/capita by 2025 and 2050
respectively.
The strategy for the utilisation of national energy sources by the Government and/or Regional
Governments includes the following measures:
• Utilisation of renewable energy from waterflow and waterfall, geothermal, sea wave, tidal
and ocean thermal energy conversion and wind for electricity generation;
• Utilisation of solar for electricity generation and non-electricity energy for industry,
households and transportation;
• Utilisation of biomass and waste for electricity generation and transportation;
• Utilisation of natural gas for industry, electricity generation, households and transportation
specifically in cases that offer the highest value added;
• Utilisation of coal for electricity generation and industry;
• Utilisation of new solid and gas energy sources for electricity generation;
• Utilisation of ocean thermal energy conversion as a prototype for early-stage connection to
the power grid;
• Utilisation of PV solar cells for transportation, industry, commercial buildings and
households; and
• Maximising and making compulsory the utilisation of solar components and solar power
plants that are manufactured domestically.